z	z
NAME
z  -  A text editor
SYNOPSIS
z [files]
DESCRIPTION

Z is a text editor which is especially useful for creating source programs in the C programming language. It has the following features:
*	It's very similar to the Unix editor vi: if you know vi, you know Z.
"' It's a full-screen editor: the screen acts as a window into the file being edited
"' Z has a wealth of commands, and commands are  specified with just a few keystrokes,  allowing editing to be performed quickly and efficiently. The simple and natural way of entering commands and the mnemonic assignment of commands to keys makes the commands easy  to remember and use.
*	Z has commands for the following:
+ Bringing different sections of a file into view;
+ Inserting text;
+ Making changes to text;
+ Rearranging text by moving blocks of  text around and by inserting text from other files;
+ Accessing files;
+ Searching for character strings and "regular expressions''.
*	Z has several commands which are useful for editing C programs: there are commands for finding matching parentheses, square brackets, and curly braces; for finding the beginning of the next or preceding function; and for finding the next or preceding blank line.
" Most commands can be easily executed repeatedly.
*	Sequences of commands, called macros, can be defined and executed one or more times.
*	Changes are made to an in-memory copy of a file; the file itself isn't changed until a command is explicitly given;
"' Z has a feature which is useful when editing a large number of related files: the operator can request that a file containing a certain function be edited; Z will automatically find the file and prepare it for editing.


- util.56 -
z
Requirements
Z runs on several systems, including
*  IBM PC, running PCDOS version 2.0 or later
*	8086-based systems running CP/M-86 and using an ADM-3A or LSI terminal;
*	The Macintosh
*	The Amiga
*	TRS-80, model 4, using TRSDOS
For 8086-based systems, Z requires at least 128KB of memory and allows you to edit programs containing up to 58 K bytes of text.
For 8080- and Z80-based systems, Z requires 64 KB of memory and allows you edit programs containing up to 11 K bytes of text.
Components
The Z package contains two programs: Z, the text editor;
ctags, a utility for creating a file which relates tags to C source files.
Preview
The remainder of this description of Z is divided into the following sections:
getting started , which describes how to quickly start using Z;
comnumds and features , which presents an overview of the features and commands of Z;
summary , which summarizes the Z commands.


















- util.57 -
z	z
1. GETIING STARTED
Z is a very powerful tool for creating and editing C source programs, but its wealth of commands and options can be overwhelming to someone not familiar with it. The purpose of this chapter is to get you using Z as quickly as possible, by presenting a small subset of the Z commands, with which programs can be created and edited Then, with the ability to create and edit programs, you can continue reading the rest of this manual at your leisure to learn about the other features and commands of Z.
This section is divided into two subsections: the first describes how to create a new C program, and the second how to edit an existing program.































- util.58 -
z	Creating a new program	z
1.1 Creating a new program
Z is activated by entering a command of the form: z hello.c
where hello.c is the name of the file to be edited Since we're creating a new program, the file doesn't exist yet, so Z says so by displaying a message on its status line (which may be either the first or last line of the display, depending on the system on which Z is running). On systems that use the first display line for status information, the screen then looks like this:
"hello.c" no such file or directory





with the cursor on the left-hand column of the second line. On systems that use the last display line for status information, the screen looks like this:




hello.c doesn't exist
with the cursor on the left-hand column of the first line.
Z is now waiting for you to enter a command
The screen
As mentioned above, Z uses the one line of the display for displaying information and for echoing the characters of some commands which are entered On the Macintosh, the  last line is the status line; on other systems, the first line is the status line.
The rest of the lines on the screen are used to display text of the file being edited
The tilde characters on the screen lines are Z's way of saying that the end of the file has been reached: these characters are not actually in the file.
Modes of Z
Z has two modes: command and insert, which allow you to enter commands and to insert text, respectively.



- util.59 -
z	Creating a new program	z
In this section, we'll spend most of our time in insert mode, using commands only to enter insert mode and to exit Z. When we get to the next section, in which we edit a file, we'll discuss more commands.
Insert mode
With Z in insert mode, characters that you type are entered into a memory-resident buffer; the  characters don't appear  in the  file until you exit insert mode and explicitly issue a command which causes Z to write the buffer to the file.
Z has several commands for entering insert mode; the one we want to use is i, which allows text to be entered before the cursor. So type i. Notice that Z doesn't echo this command on the screen; it only does that for a few commands. Notice also that we are in command mode, as evidenced by the message
<insert mode>
on the right-hand side of the status line.
Now you can enter a program, just as you would on a typewriter. Notice that the cursor is positioned where the next character will be entered. Try entering the "hello world" program:
main()
{
printf("hello,  world\ n");
}
When you hit the <return> key after entering the printf line, the cursor was left positioned on the next line of the screen underneath the first non-white space character of the preceding line. This feature, which is known as "autoindent", is useful when creating C programs, encouraging statements within a compound statement to be indented and lined up. Autoindent can be disabled and enabled, and we'll show you how later.
We want the closing curly brace of the main function to be on the first column of the line, not indented. So type the backspace key to get back to the first column, and then type the '}' key.
The backspace key can also be  used  to  backspace  over  characters that you  incorrectly  type.
When you're done inserting the program, hit the escape key to exit insert mode and return to command mode. The key used as the escape key varies from system to system. On the IBM PC, the key labeled ESC is the escape key. On  the TRS-80, models III and 4, the key labeled BREAK is the escape key. And on the Macintosh, the backquote key, ', is the escape key.



- util.60 -
z	Creating a new program Exiting Z
To write the program  you've just  entered from the text buffer  to the disk file hello.c and then exit Z., type ZZ.
Occasionally  you  may  want  to  exit  Z  without  writing  the  text you've entered to a file; in this case, type
:q!
followed by a carriage return, CR



































- util.61 -
z	Editing an existing file	z
1.2 Editing an Existing File
In this section we're going to present a few commands which will allow you to make changes to an existing file.
Starting and stopping Z
You get in and out of Z when editing an existing file just as you do when creating a new file. To start Z, enter
z hello.c
where hello.c is the name of the file to be edited  And to stop Z and save the changes you've made, put Z in command mode and enter:
zz
Z knows if you made changes to the original text or not; if you did, it saves the original file by changing the extension of its name to .bak and then writes the modified text to a new file having the specified name. If a .lxik file with that name already exists, it will be deleted before the rename occurs.
If you didn't make any changes, the ZZ command causes Z to halt without changing any disk files.
The command :qi will cause Z to halt without writing anything to the file being edited
Going back to the startup of Z, Z reads the specified file into the text buff er, displays the first screenful of the file's text, displays the file's statistics (name, number of lines, number of characters) on the status line, positions the cursor at the first character of the first line, and enters command mode, waiting for you to enter a command
The cursor
Before describing the commands for viewing and changing the text
in Z's memory-resident buffer, we need to discuss the cursor.
In Z, the character position in the text which is pointed at by the cursor acts as a reference point: most commands perform an action relative to that position. For example, the i command, described in the last section, allows you to enter text before the cursor. And the x command, to be discussed, deletes the character at which the cursor is located
So we will be describing two types of commands in this section: those that move the cursor around in the text, thus bringing different sections of text into view, and those that modify text in the vicinity of
the cursor.	"   '
Moving around in the text: scrolling
The text you created in section 1, for the "hello, world" program, easily fit on a single screen. But most text files are too large to be

- util.62 -
z	Edi ting an existing file	z
viewed all at once, so we need commands to bring different sections into view.
Two such commands are the "scroll" commands: "scroll down", represented by the character control-D, and "scroll up", represented by control-U. That is, to execute the "scroll down" command, you hold down the control key and then depress the 'D' key.
The key used as the control key differs from system to system. On the IBM PC, it's the key labeled 'Ctrl'. On the Macintosh, it's the cloverleaf key (the key next to the 'Option' key that has the unusual symbol).
In the rest of this manual, we will refer to control characters using notation of the form AD rather than control-D, for brevity. Thus, the "scroll up" and "scroll down" commands are represented as AU and AD, respectively.
A scroll command moves the screen up or down in the file, bringing another half-screen's worth of text into view. It's as if the text was on a reel of tape and the screen is a viewer: scrolling down moves the viewer down the reel, and scrolling up moves the viewer up the reel
When scrolling, the cursor will be left on the same position within the text after the scroll as before, if that position is still within view. Otherwise, the cursor is moved to a line in the text which was newly brought into view.
Moving around in the text: the 'Go' oommand
Scrolling is one way to move around in the text, but it's slow. If we have a large text file, to which we want to append text, it would take a long time and many scroll commands to reach the end
The go command, g, is one way to move rapidly to the point of interest in the text: entering g by itself will move the cursor to the end of the  text and, if necessary, redraw the  screen with the text  which precedes it
The g command can also be preceded by the number of the line of interest; in this case, the cursor is moved to the beginning of that line. So to move back to the first line of text, enter:
lg
The g command can be used to move to any line within the text, but since you usually don't know the numbers of the lines, the g command is mainly used to move to the beginning and end of the text
Moving around in the text: string searching
So, scrolling allows us to take a casual stroll through text, and the g
command to move rapidly to the beginning and end of the file. What

- util.63 -
z	Editing an existing file	z
we  need  is  a command  to  rapidly  move  to  a specific  point  in  the middle of the text.
The "string search" command, /, is such a command When you enter /, followed by the string of interest, followed by a carriage return, Z searches forward in the text from the cursor position, looking for the string If Z reaches the end of the text without finding the string. it will "wrap around", and continue searching from the beginning of the text
If the string is found, the cursor is positioned at its first character and, if necessary, the screen is redrawn with its surrounding text
If the string  isn't found, a message saying so is displayed on the status line of the screen and the cursor isn't moved
While the "string search" command and its string are being entered, the characters are displayed on the status line, and normal editing operations can be used, such as backspacing over mistyped characters.
Z remembers the last string searched for. To repeat  the  search, enter the "find next string" command, n.
Finely tuned moves
With the commands presented up to now, you can move to the area of interest in the text The next few paragraphs present  commands which move the cursor from somewhere within the area of interest to a specific character position, from which changes will be made.
Some commands for this, from the many available in Z, are:
- and CR (carriage return)
Move the cursor up and down one line, respectively, to the first non-whitespace character on the line;
space and backspace
Move  the cursor right and left, respectively,  on the line on which the cursor is located
These commands can be preceded by a number, which cause the command to be performed the specified number  of  times.  For example,
3-
moves the cursor up three lines, and 5<space>
moves the cursor right five characters.  Note that <space>  represents
the space bar.	"-----/
Deleting text
You now have a repetoire of commands which allow you to move the cursor fairly quickly to any location in a text file. We're ready to

- u til.64 -
z	Editing an existing file
move on to a few commands for modifying the text
Two  such  commands,  for  deleting  text,  are "delete character",  x,
and "delete line", dd:
x	Deletes the character under the cursor;
dd	Deletes the entire line on which the cursor is located Each of these commands can be preceded by a number, causing the
command to be repeated the specified number of times. For example,
2x
deletes two characters, and
3dd deletes three lines.
More insert commands
You already know one command for inserting text: i, which allows text to be inserted before the cursor. We need a few more insert commands:
a	Enters insert mode such that text is inserted following the cursor;

0



0
Summary
Creates a blank line below the current  line  (ie, the line on which the cursor is located), moves the cursor to the new line, and enters insert mode;
Same as o, but the new line is above the current line.
With the set of commands presented in this chapter, you can edit any text file. You should continue reading this manual, to learn more about Z, while you use the basic command set for performing your editing chores.
You'll find that Z has many more capabilities, which allow you to perform functions more quickly, with fewer keystrokes, than with the basic command set, and which allow you to perform functions which you can't perform with the basic command set
The commands in the basic set are listed on the next page.








- util.65 -
z	Editing an existing file	z
Starting and stopping Z
Z filename Start Z, and prepare 'filename' for editing
ZZ	Stop Z, and write modified text to the edit file
:q!	Stop Z, without writing anything to the edit file
scrolling
"'D	Move down half a screenful A U	Move up half a screenful
Moving the cursor
g	Move the cursor to the end of the text, or to a specific line
/str		Search  for  the  character  string  "str"  and  move  the cursor to it
n	Search again, using the same string Move cursor up a line
CR	Move cursor down a line
space	Move cursor right one character backspace  Move cursor left one character
Inserting text
1	Insert before cursor
a	Insert after cursor
o	Insert new line below current line
0	Insert new line above current line
Deleting text
x	Delete character under cursor
dd	Delete line on which cursor is located

















- util.66 -
z
2. More commands
In this section we're going to describe the rest of the features and commands of Z, building and expanding on the information presented in the previous chapter. The section is organized  into  subsections; some describe a group of related commands, some a particular feature, and some how to perform a specific function with Z





































- util.67 -
z	Introduction	z
21 Introduction
Before getting into the Z commands, we want to discuss in more detail the way that Z displays information on the screen and the way that commands are entered
21.1 The screen
We've already discussed the basic details on Z s use of the screen. There's just a few more things to discuss: the display of unprintable characters and the display of lines which don't fit on the screen.
2.1.1.1 Displaying unprintable characters
A file edited by Z can contain any character whose ASCII value in decimal is less than 128, including unprintable characters, such as SOH, LF, and ESC. Z displays unprintable characters as two characters; the first is /\, and the second is the character whose ASCII value equals that of the character itself plus Ox40. For example, the unprintable character SOH is displayed as the pair of characters  /\A,  since  the ASCII value of SOH is 1, and 1 plus Ox40 is Ox41, which is the ASCII value for the character 'A'.
21.1.2 Displaying lines that don't fit on the screen
In the previous chapter we said that lines beyond the end of the file are displayed with the  character - in the first column of the line on the screen. When you see the - character in the leftmost column of a line on the  screen, this usually signifies that this line of the display doesn't contain a line of text. Lines which don't fit on the screen are displayed by Z in a similar manner, as you'll soon see.
Z allows lines to be entered which are longer than a screen line. Normally, Z simply displays such lines on several screen lines. In some cases, however, the entire line won't fit on the screen. For example, if the cursor is positioned at the beginning of the file, it may not be possible to display the text of an entire big line at the bottom of the screen. In this case, Z displays an @ character in the first column of the screen lines on which the text would be displayed
Thus, when  you see the @ character in the leftmost column of a line on the screen, this usually signifies that the text which would have appeared on this line of the screen was too big, and not that the @ character is in the text
21.2 Commands
When most commands are entered,  Z doesn't echo  the characters on the screen. For some commands, however, it does. In this latter category are the commands whose first character begins  with  : and with the string search commands.
For these commands, the characters are displayed on the screen's status line, and can be backspaced over and reentered, if necessary.

- util.68 -
z	Introduction
Also,  Z doesn't  act  on  such commands  until  you  type  the  carriage return key, CR
2.1.3 Special Keys
There are two keys that have special meaning for Z: the escape key, which is used to exit insert mode, and the control key, which is used in conjunction with another key to  generate control characters. The actual keys used for these functions varies from system to system, as mentioned in the previous chapter.
The escape key is ESC on the IBM PC. On the TRS-80, models III and 4, it's the BREAK key. And on the Macintosh, it's the backquote key, '.
The control key is 'Ctrl' on the IBM PC. On theMacintosh it's the key next to the 'Option' key that has the cloverleaf symbol.
On the Macintosh, there are times when you want to generate a backquote, and not escape. For example, backquote is a cursor motion command to Z. To generate backquote, hold down the control key (the key next to the option key), and then type backquote.


























- util.69 -
z	Paging and Scrolling	z
2.2 Paging and Scrolling
In the last chapter we described  commands  for  scrolling  through text, "'U and "'D. Another pair of commands allow you to page, instead of scroll, through text. They are "'B and "'F, which page backwards and forwards,  respectively.
A page command brings the previous or next screenful of text into view by redrawing the screen with the new text. Whereas scrolling was described as a viewer moving over a reel of tape, paging can be described as the turning of pages of a book.
Paging moves you through text more quickly than scrolling does. However, since paging redraws the screen all at once, while scrolling changes it gradually, it's often more difficult to keep a sense of continuity when paging than when scrolling. As an aid to continuity when paging, two lines of text which were previously in view are still in view after paging.
In the discussion of scrolling in the last chapter, we neglected to mention that the scroll commands can  be  preceded  by  a  value specifying the number of lines to be scrolled up or down. If a number isn't specified, the last scroll value entered is used; if a scroll value  was never entered, it defaults to half a screen's worth of  lines.  Separate values are maintained  for scrolling up and for scrolling down.
The scrolling and paging commands  necessarily move the cursor within the text, but they can't be used to home the cursor to an exact position at which changes are to be made. For this, you'll have to use commands described in subsequent sections.




















- util.70 -
z	Searching for Strings
2.3 Searching for strin
In the previous chapter, we described the string search command,
/, which causes Z to scan forward, looking for the string. In this section, we describe the rest of the searching capabilities of Z. First, the rest of the string searching commands are described; then, the capability of Z to match patterns called "regular expressions", of which specific character strings are a special case, is described
23.1 1be other string-searching commands
The other string-searching commands are:
?	Behaves like /, but Z finds the previous occurence of the string rather than the next;
n	Repeats the last string-search command;
N		Repeats  the  last  string-search  command,  but  in  the opposite direction;
:se ws=O and :se ws=l
Turns the wrap scan option off or on, respectively.
When Z reaches the end or beginning of text without finding the string of interest, it normally "wraps around" to the opposite end of the text and continues the search. It does this because by default the "wrap scan" option is on. This option can be disabled by entering the "set option" command:
:se wS=O
thus causing the  search  to end when  it reaches the end of text  The option can be reenabled by entering:
:se ws= l
Note that for this colon command, as for all colon commands, carriage return must be typed before the command is executed
2.3.2	Regular expressions
The string you tell Z to search for is actually a "regular expression". A regular expression is a pattern which is matched to character strings. The pattern can define a specific sequence of characters which comprise the string; in this case, only that specific string matches the pattern. The pattern can also contain special characters which match a class of characters; in this case, the pattern can match any of a number of character strings.
For example, one such special construct is square brackets surrounding a character string; this matches any character in the enclosed string. So the regular expression
ab[xyz]cd


á	util.71 •
z	Searching for Strings	z
matches the strings
abxcd abycd abzcd
Another special character is •, which matches any number of occurences of the preceding pattern. For example, the regular expression
ab*c
matches many strings, including
ac abc abbc
and so on. And the pattern ab[xyz]*cd
matches many strings, including:
abed abxcd abxycd abzzxcd
and so on.
··
The complete list of special characters and constructs that can be
included in regular expressions is:
A	When  the first character  of a pattern,  it matches the beginning of the line
$


<
>
[str]
[AStr]
[x-y]
*
When  the  last character  of a pattern,  it matches  the end of the line;
Matches any single character; Matches the beginning of a word; Matches the end of a word;
Matches any single character in the enclosed string; Matches  any  single  character  not  in  the  enclosed string;
Matches any character between x and y;
Matches any number  of occurences of the preceding pattern.
2.3.3 Disabling extended pattern matching
The  "magic"  option  enables  and  disables  the  extended  pattern matching capability. To turn off this option, enter:
:se ma=O
And to turn it on, enter:

- util.72 -
z	Searching for Strings	L
:se ma=l
By default, extended pattern matching is disabled
With the magic option off, only the characters A  and $ are special in patterns.










































- util.73 -
z	Local Moves	z
2.4	Local Moves
In this section we're going to present more commands for moving the cursor fairly short distances; up or down a few lines, along the line on which it's located, and so on. We've already presented several, namely CR (carriage return), space, and backspace; but there are many more, reflecting the importance of finely-tuned, quickly-executed movements to the user.
2.4.1	Moving around on the screen:
Herc arc some commands for moving the cursor short distances: h	Moves to the left one character;
j	Moves down one line, leaving the cursor in the same column;
k		Moves  up  one  line,  leaving  the  cursor  in  the  same column;
Moves right one cursor;
The keys "H, LF, "K, and "L are synonyms for h,j,k, and 1, respectively.
These commands can be preceded by a number, which specifies the number of times the command is to be repeated
Z has commands for moving the cursor to the top, middle, and bottom of the screen; they are H, M, and L, respectively. The cursor is positioned at the beginning of the line to which it's moved
Remember the - command,  which moved the cursor up a line, to the first non·whitespace character? As you might expect, + will move the cursor down a line, to the first non·whitespace character. + is thus equivalent to CR, the command presented in the last chapter.
2.4.2	Moving within a line
We've already presented several commands for moving the cursor around within the line on which it's located:
h, "H, backspace
I,"L, space
Here are a few more:
Left one character; Right one character;
A	Moves the cursor to the first non whitespace character on the line;
0	Moves to the first character on the line;
$	Moves to the last character on the line;
A few commands fetch another character from the keyboard, search for that character, beginning at the current cursor location, and leave the cursor near the character:
f	Scan forward, looking for the character, and leave the


- util.74 -
z	Local Moves	z
cursor on it;
t	Same  as /, but  leave  the  cursor  on  the  character preceding the found character;
F	Same as f, but scan backwards;
T	Same as t, but scan backwards.
Repeat the last f, t, F, or T command;
Repeat the last f, t, F, or T command in the opposite direction.
Finally, the command I moves the cursor to the column whose number precedes the command. For example, the following command moves the cursor to column 56 on the current line:
561
2.4.3	Word movements
Z has several commands for moving the cursor to the beginning or end of a word which is near the cursor:
w	Moves to the beginning of the next word;
b	Moves to the beginning of the previous word; e	Moves to the end of the current word.
For the preceding commands, a "word" is defined in the normal way: a string of alphabetical and numerical characters surrounded by whitespace or punctuation. There is a variant of each of these commands, differing only in the definition of a "word": they think that
á	a word is any string of nonwhitespace characters surrounded by whitespace. The variant of each of these commands is identified by the same letter, but in upper case instead of lower:
W	Moves to the beginning of the next big word;
B	Moves to the beginning of the previous big word; E	To the end of the current big word.
Each of these commands can be preceded by a number, specifying the number of times the command is to be repeated For example,
5w
moves forward five words.
The word movement commands will cross line boundaries, if necessary, to find the word they're looking for.
2.4.4	Moves within C programs
Z has several commands for moving the cursor within C programs:
]J and [[		Move to the opening curly brace, {, of the next or previous function, respectively;
%	Move to the parenthesis, square bracket, or curly bracket which matches the one on which the cursor is currently located;

- util.75 -
z	Local Moves
{ and }	Move to the preceding or next blank line.
The [[ and ]] commands assume that the opening and closing curly braces for a function are in the first column of a line,  and that  all other curly braces are indented
Al) an example of the '%' command, given the statement: while (((a = getchar()) != EOF) && (c != 'a'))
with the cursor on the parenthesis immediately following the 'while', the % command will move the cursor to the last closing parenthesis on the line.
24.5 Marking and returning
Z has commands which allow you to set markers in the text and later return to a marker. Twenty six markers are available, identified by the alphabetical letters.
Unlike the other commands described in this section, these commands are not limited to moves within the current  area of  the cursor - they can move the cursor anywhere within the text.
A marker is set at the current cursor location using the command
mx
where x is the letter with which you want to mark the location. There are two commands for returning to a marked position:
'x	Moves the cursor to the location marked with  the letter 'x';
'x	Moves the cursor to the first non-whitespace character on the line containing the 'x' marker.
Remember, to generate backquote on the Macintosh, hold down the control key and then type backquote.
Occasionally, you may accidently move the cursor far from the desired position. There are two single quote commands for returning you to the area from which you moved:
"	Returns the cursor to its exact starting point;
"	Returns the cursor to the first non-whitespace character on the line from which the cursor was moved
For example, if the cursor is on the line: if (a >= 'm' && a <= 'z')
at the character '<', then following a command which moves the cursor far away, the command " will return the cursor to the '<' character, and the command " will return it to the beginning of the word 'if'.


- util.76 -
z	Local Moves
2.4.6 Adjusting the screen
The z command is used to redraw the screen, with a certain line at the top, middle, or bottom of the screen.
To use  it, place  the cursor  on the  desired  line,  then  enter  the  Z command, followed by one of these characters:
CR	To place the line at the top of the screen; To place it in the middle of the screen; To place it at the bottom.
The z command isn't a true cursor motion command, because  the cursor is in the same position in the text after the command as before.
































- util.77 -
z	Making Changes
2.5	Making changes
That concludes the presentation of cursor  movement  commands. The next several sections describe commands for making changes to the  text
2.5.1	Small changes
In this section we present commands for making small changes. We've already presented two such commands in the previous chapter:
x	Which deletes the character at which the cursor is located;
dd	Which deletes the line at which the cursor is located
The other commands are:
X	Delete the character which precedes the cursor; can be preceded by a count of the number of characters to be deleted;
D	Delete the rest of the line, starting at the cursor position;
rx	Replace the character at the cursor with 'x';
R	Start overlaying characters, beginning at the cursor. Type the escape key to terminate the command (Remember, this key differs from system to system);
s		Delete the character at the cursor and enter insert mode; when preceded by a number, that number of characters are deleted before entering insert mode;
S	Delete the line at the cursor and enter insert mode; when preceded by a count, that number of lines are deleted before entering insert mode;
C	Delete the rest of the line, beginning  at  the  cursor, and enter insert mode;
J	Join the line  on which the cursor is positioned with the following line; when preceded by a count, that many lines are joined
2.5.2	Operators for deleting and changing text
Z has a small number of commands, called 'operators', for modifying text. They aJl have the same form, consisting of a single letter command, optionally preceded by a count and always followed by a cursor motion command The count specifies the number of times the command is to be executed The command affects the text from the current cursor position to the destination of the cursor motion command, if the starting and ending position of the cursor are on the same line. If these positions are on different lines, the command affects all lines between and including the lines which contain the starting position and ending positions.



- util.78 -
z	Making Lhanges
In this section, we're  going to describe  the operators  for deleting and changing text, d and c:
d	Deletes	text	as   defined	by	the	cursor	motion command;
c	Same as d, but Z enters insert mode following the
deletion.
For example, dw
3dw
d3w
db
d'a





d/ var

d$

Deletes text from the current cursor location to the beginning of the next word;
Deletes text from the cursor to the beginning of the third word;
Same as '3dw'·
Deletes text fom the current to the beginning of the previous word;
Deletes text from the cursor to the marker 'a', if the marker and the starting cursor position are on  the same line. Otherwise, deletes lines from that on which the cursor is located through that on which the marker is located; On the Macintosh, generate backquote by holding down the control key and then typing the backquote key.
Deletes text either from the cursor to the string "var" or between the lines at which the cursor is currently located and that on which the string is located
Deletes the rest of the characters on the line,  and hence is equivalent to D.
2.5.3	Deleting and changing lines
In the last chapter, we presented a command for deleting lines: dd. As you can see now, this is a special form of the d command, because the character following the first d is not a cursor motion command
For all the operator commands, typing the command  character twice will affect whole lines. Thus, typing cc will clear the line on which the cursor is located and enter insert mode. Preceding cc with a number will compress the specified number of lines to a single blank line and enter insert mode on that line.
2.5.4 Moving blocks of text
When text is deleted using the d or c command, it's moved to a buffer called the "unnamed buffer". (There are other buffers available, which have names. More about them later).
Data  in  the  unnamed  buffer  can  be  copied  into  the  main  text
buff er using one of the "put" commands:
p	Copies the unnamed buffer into the main text buffer, after the cursor;

- util.79 -
z	Making Changes
p	Same as p, but the text is placed before the cursor.
Thus, the delete and put commands together provide a convenient way to move blocks of text within a file.
The contents of the unnamed buffer is  very volatile: when any command is issued that modifies the text, the text which was modified is placed in the unnamed buffer. This is done so that the modification can be 'undone', if necessary, using one of the 'undo' commands. For example, if you delete a character using the x command, the deleted character is placed in the unnamed buffer, replacing whatever was in there. So you have to be careful when moving text via the unnamed buffer: if you delete text into the unnamed buffer, expecting to put it back somewhere, then issue another command which modifies the text before issuing the put command, the deleted text is no longer in the unnamed buffer.
As you'll see, the named buffers can also be used to move blocks of text, and their contents are not volatile.
25.5 Duplicating blocks of text: the 'yank' operator
The 'yank' operator, y, copies text into the unnamed buffer without first deleting it from the main text buffer. When used with the 'put' command, it thus provides a convenient way for duplicating a block of text
Since y is an operator, it has the same form as the other operators: an optional count, followed by the y command, followed by a cursor motion command The command yanks the text from the cursor position to the destination of the cursor motion command, if the starting and ending positions are on the same line. If they are on separate lines, a whole number of lines are yanked, from that on which the cursor is currently located through that to which the cursor would be moved by the cursor motion command The text is yanked into the unnamed buffer.
For example,
yw	Copies text from the cursor to the next word into the unnamed buffer;
y3w	Copies text from the cursor to the beginning of the third word;
3yw	Same as 'y3w';
y'a	Copies text from the cursor location to the marker 'a' into the unnamed buffer, if the two positions are on the same line. Otherwise, copies entire lines between and including those containing the two positions.
As a special case, the command yy will yank a specified number of whole lines. The command Y is a synonym for yy. For example,
yy	Yanks the line at which the cursor is located;

- util.80 -
z	Making Lnanges

3Y	Yanks three  lines, beginning  with  the one on which the cursor is located
25.6 Named buffers
In addition to the unnamed buffers, Z has twenty six named buffers, each identified by a letter of the alphabet, which can used for rearranging text. Text can be deleted or yanked into a named buffer and put from it back into the main text buff er.
The advantage of these buffers over the unnamed buffer in rearranging text is that their contents are not volatile: when you put something in a named buffer, it stays there, and won't be overwritten unexpectedly. Also, as you'll see, the named buffers can be used to move text from one file to another.
To yank text into a named buffer, use the yank operator, preceded by a double quote and the buffer name, and followed by a cursor motion command For example, the following will yank three words into the 'a' buffer:
"ay3w
and the following yanks four lines into the 'b' buffer, beginning with the line on which the cursor is located:
"b4yy
Text is deleted into a named buffer in the same way: the delete command is used, preceded by a double quote and the buffer name. For  example,  to  delete characters  from  the  cursor  to  the  'a'  marker
·into the 'h' buffer:
"hd'a
The preceding command, when the source and destination cursor positions are on separate lines, will delete a number of whole lines into the 'h' buffer, from that on which the cursor is initially located through that containing the destination position.
As yOu  remember, on the Macintosh, the backquote key is interpreted as the escape key. To generate a real backquote for use in the preceding example, you must hold down the control key (the key with the strange symbol next to the option key) and then type backquote.
To delete ten lines into the 'c' buffer: "clOdd
Text in a named buffer  is put back  into  the  main text using the '-----·  'put' commands p and P, preceded by a double quote and the buffer
name. For example:
ap	Puts text from the 'a' buffer, after the cursor;

- util.81 -
z	Making Changes
zP	Puts text from the 'z' buffer, before the cursor.
25.7 Moving text between files
The named buffers  are conveniently used to move text from one file to another. First yank or delete text from one file into a named buffer; then switch and begin editing the target file, using the :e command:
:e filename
(More  on this later). Then move  the  cursor  to  the  desired  position; then put text from the named buffer.
This technique only works when using named buffers, not with the unnamed buffer. When switching to a new file, the unnamed buffer is cleared, but the named buffers are not
25.8	Shifting text
The last two operator commands to introduce are the 'shift' operators, < and >, which are used to shift text left and right a tabwidth, respectively.
For example,
>/Str
shifts right one tab width the lines from that on which  the cursor is located through that containing the string "str".
Following the standard operator syntax, repeating the shift operator twice affects a number of whole lines:
5<<	Shifts five lines left;
>>	Shifts one line right.
25.9	Undoing and redoing changes
Z remembers  the  last change  you  made,  and has a command,  u,
which undoes it, restoring the text to its original state.
Z also remembers all the changes which were made to the last line which was modified Another 'undo' command, U, undoes all changes made to that line.
Finally, the period command, '.', reexecutes the last command that modified  text









- util.82 -
z	Inserting Text	z
26 Inserting text
We've already presented most of the commands for entering insert mode:
a	Append after cursor;
i	Insert before cursor;
o	Open new line below cursor;
0	Open new line above cursor;
C	Delete to end of line, then enter insert mode; s	Delete characters, then enter insert mode;
S	Delete lines, then enter insert mode;
In this section we want to present the remaining few commands for entering insert mode, and present some other features of insert mode.
2.6.1	Additional insert commands
The other commands for entering insert mode are:
A	Append characters at the end of the line on which the cursor is located This is equivalent to $a;
I	Insert before the first non-whitespace character on the current line. This is equivalent to Ai.
2.6.2	Insert mode commands
Some editing can be done on text entered  during  insert  mode, using the following control characters:
backspace  Delete the last character entered; AH	Same as 'backspace' character; AD	Same as "backspace';
AX	Erase to beginning of insert on current line;
AV	Enter next character into text without attempting to interpret it
AV is used to enter non-printing characters into the text For example, to enter the character 'control-A' into the text, type
AVAA
That is, hold down the control key, then type the 'V' key, then the 'A' key, then release the control key. As mentioned earlier, non-printing characters are displayed as two characters: >A• followed by a character whose ASCII code equals that of the non- printing character plus Ox40.
26.3 Autoindent
The Z 'autoindent' option is useful when entering C programs. When you are in insert mode and type the 'carriage return' key, with the autoindent option enabled, the cursor  will  be  automatically indented on the new line to the same column on which the first non­ whitespace character appeared on the previous line. This feature is useful for editing C programs because it encourages statements which

- util.83 -
z	Inserting Text	z
are part of the same compound statement to be indented the same amount, thus making the program more readable.
Z autoindents a line by inserting tab and space characters at the beginning of a new line. If you don't want to be indented that much, you can backspace over these automatically inserted tabs and spaces until you reach the desired degree of indentation.
The autoindent option can be selectively enabled and disabled using the 'set options' command:
:se ai=O	to disable autoindent
:se ai= l	to enable autoindent
When Z is activated, autoindent is enabled.































- util.84 -
z	Macros
2.7	Macros
Z allows you to define a sequence of commands, called a 'macro', and then execute the macro one or more times.
When a macro is defined to Z, it's placed in a special buffer, called the macro buffer, and  then executed once. There are two  ways  to define a macro to Z: immediately and indirectly.
2.7.1	Immediate macro definition
An 'immediate' macro definition is initiated by typing  the characters
:>
Z res1xmds by clearing the status line, displaying these characters on the line, and waiting for you to enter the sequence of commands.
As you enter the commands, Z displays them on the status line and enters them immediately into the macro buffer; that's why it's called 'immediate  macro  definition'.
If you make a mistake while entering commands, you can simply backspace and enter the correct characters.
To terminate the definition, type the carriage return key. Z will then execute the sequence of commands in the macro buffer. The contents of this buffer are not altered by executing the macro, so you can reexecute the macro without reentering it, as described below.
2.7.2	Some examples
The following macro advances the cursor one line, and deletes the first word on the new line:
+dw
contains two commands: +, which advances the cursor, and dw, which deletes the word beneath the cursor.
The next macro moves the cursor to the previous line and deletes the last character on the line:
-$x
It contains three commands: -. which moves the cursor to the previous line; $, which moves the cursor to the last character on that line; and x, which deletes the character beneath the cursor.
You can also insert text using a macro. You enter insert mode using one of the normal insert commands. The characters which follow the insert command on the macro line, up to a terminating escape character, are then inserted into the text The escape character causes Z to return to command mode and continue executing commands in the macro which follow the insert command

- util.85 -
z	Macros
Remember, the key used as the escape character differs from system to system. See section 1 of this chapter for details.
For example, the following macro advances the cursor to the next line, deletes the second word on the line, inserts the character string "and furthermore", and deletes the last word on the line:
+wdwiand furthermore<ESC>$bdw
The last macro contains the following commands:
+	Advances the cursor to the next line;
w	Moves the cursor to the second word on the line; dw	Deletes the word beneath the cursor;
iand furthermore<ESC>
Inserts the text "and furthermore". <ESC>  stands for the escape key;
$	Moves the cursor to the last character on the line;
b	Moves the cursor to the beginning of the last word on the line;
dw	Deletes that word
Z also allows you to search for a string from within a macro. Enter in the macro the 'string search' command (for example,  /), followed by the string, followed by the ESC character. For example, the following macro moves the cursor to the word "Ralph" and deletes it
/Ralph<ESC>dw
It contains the commands
/Ralph<ESC>
Moves  the  cursor escape key;
dw	Deletes "Ralph".
to "Ralph". <ESC>  stands for the
The following macro finds "Ralph" and replaces it with "Sarah":
/Ralph<ESC>cwSarah<ESC>
It contains the commands:
/Ralph<ESC>
Moves the cursor to "Ralph"; cwSarah<ESC>
Changes "Ralph" to "Sarah".
2.7.3 Indirect macro definitioo
The other way of defining a macro is to yank a line containing a sequence of commands from the main text buffer into a named buffer '-_/ and then have Z move the contents of the named buffer to the macro buffer.



- util.86 -
z	Macros
Commands for indirect macro definition are:
@x	Causes Z to move the contents of the 'x' buffer to the macro buffer and then execute  it once;
xv	A synonym for '@x'.
Indirect macro definition of macros has several advantages over immediate definition: for one, if a macro defined immediately is incorrect, you have to reenter the entire macro. With an indirectly defined macro, you can edit the macro definition in  the  main  text buffer and then move it back to the macro buffer.
Another advantage is that you can store several macros in the named buffers and easily reexecute a macro, without having to reenter it With immediate definition, when a new macro is defined, the previously defined macro is lost, and must be reentered to be reexecuted
One difference between entering macros immediately and via the text buffer and named buffer concerns the method for specifying the end of a search string and for exiting insert mode. With immediate definition, you do this by typing the ESC  key directly. For indirect definition, in which the macro is  first entered into the main  text buffer, typing the ESC key would cause Z to exit insert mode, not to enter the ESC key into to text of the macro. In this case, you enter the ESC key by first typing control-V, then ESC. This causes Z to enter the ESC character into the text of the macro  and remain  in  insert mode.
2.7.4	Re-executing  macr
Once a macro is defined and is in the macro buffer, it can be re­ executed by typing one of the commands:
@@
v
Preceding the command with a count will cause the macro to be executed the specified number of times.
2.7.5	Wrapping around during macro execution
While executing a macro, Z may reach the beginning or end of the text, and want to continue beyond that point. This is especially true when reexecuting macros. The 'macro wrap' option, wm, specifies whether Z should terminate the macro execution at that point, or continue at the opposite end of the text.
This   option   is   enabled   and   disabled   using   the   'set   options'
',  /  command:
:se wm=O
:se wm= l
To disable macro wrapping; To enable it.


- util.87 -
Z	Macros	z
When Z starts, this option is enabled














































- util.88 -
z	Ex Commands
2.8	The Ex-like commands
The 'substitute' and 'repeat last substitution' commands are part of a set of commands that are being added to the Z editor and that are similar to commands in the UNIX Ex editor. In this section we will first generally describe the syntax of these commands, then the 'substitute' command, and finally the 'repeat  last  substitution' command
The Ex-like commands consist of a leading colon, followed by zero, one, or two addresses identifying the lines to be affected by the command, followed by a single-letter command, followed by command parameters, and terminated by a carriage return.  Most commands have a default set of lines that they affect, thus frequently allowing you to enter commands without explicitly specifying a range.
These commands support regular expressions, as defined in the Z documentation, for identifying addresses and strings to be searched for.
2.8.1	Addresses in Ex commands
An address can be one of the following:
" A period, ., addresses the current line; that is, the  line on which the cursor is located
¥	The character $ addresses the last line in the edit buffer.
"  A decimal number n addresses the n-th line in the edit buffer.
*	'x addreses the line marked with the mark name x. Lines are marked with the m command
*	A regular expression surrounded by slashes (/) addresses the first line containing a string that matches the regular expression. The search begins with the line following the current line and continues towards the end of the edit buffer. If a line isn't found when the end of the buffer is reached, and if Z s ws option is set to l (ie, by the :se ws=l command) the search continues at the beginning of the buffer, stopping when the current line is reached
¥	A regular expression surrounded by question marks (?) also addresses the first line containing a string that matches the regular expression. But in this case,  the search begins with the line preceding the current line in the edit buffer and continues towards the beginning of the buffer. If a line isn't found when the beginning of the buffer is reached, and if Z s ws option is set to 1 (ie, by the :se ws=l command) the search continues at the end of the buffer, stopping when the current line is reached
*	An address followed by a plus or a minus sign, which in turn
is followed  by  a decimal  number  n addresses  the  n-th line

- util.89 -
z	Ex Commands	z
following or preceding the line identified by the address.
When two addresses are entered to define the range of lines affected by a command, the addresses are usually separated by a comma. They can also be separated by a semicolon; in this latter case, the current line is set to the line defined by the first address, and then the line corresponding to the second address is located
When no value is specified for the first address in an address range, it's assumed to be the current line or the first line in the buffer, depending on whether the second address was preceded with a comma or a semicolon. When no value is specified for the second address in an address range, it's assumed to be the last line in the buffer. Thus, if neither the beginning nor the ending address of a range is specified, the range consists of either all the lines in the buffer or the lines from the current through the last line in the buffer, depending on whether comma or semicolon is used to separate the unspecified addresses.
28.2 The 'suhititute' command
The 'substitute' command has the following form:
:[range]s/patjrep/(options]
where  square  brackets  surround  a  parameter   to  indicate  that  the parameter is optional.
Z searches the lines specified by range for strings that match the regular expression pat, replacing them with the rep string.  If range isn't specified, just the current line is searched When the command is completed, the cursor is left on the character following the last replaced string.
Normally, Z automatically replaces a string that matches pat. Specifying c as an option causes Z instead to pause when it finds a matching string, ask if you want the string to be replaced, and make the replacement only if you give your permission.
Normally, Z will replace only the first pat-matching string on a line. Specifying g as an option causes Z instead to replace all matching strings on a line; in this case,  after Z replaces a string on a line, it continues searching for more strings on the line at the character following the replaced string.
An ampersand (&) in the replacement string rep is replaced by the string that matched pat. The special meaning of & can be suppressed by preceding it with a backslash, \.
A replacement string consisting of just the percent character (%) is replaced in the current substitution by the replacement string that was used in the last substitution. The special meaning of % can be suppressed by preceding it with a backslash, \.



- util.90 -
z	Ex Commands	z
2.8.2.1 Examples
:s/abc/def/
Search the line on which the cursor is located for the string abc; if found, replace it with the string def.
:l,$s/ab*c/xyz/
Search all lines in the edit buffer for strings that begin with a, end in c, and have zero or more b's in between; replace such strings with xyz. On any given line, only the first occurrence of a string that matches the pattern is replaced
:/{/;/}/s/for/ while/c
Find the first line following the current line that contains a {; then find the first line following this line that contains a }. In the lines between and including these lines, search for the string for; for each such string, ask if it should be replaced; if yes, replace it with while.
2.8.3 The '& (repeat last substitution) command The & command has the form
:[range]&
where brackets indicate that the parameters are optional.
The & command causes the last 'substitute' command to be executed again, using the same search pattern, replacement string, and options as were  used in the previous command The command searches the lines that are specified in the & command's range; if range isn't specified, the substitution is performed on just the current line.


















- util.91 -
z	Starting and Stopping Z	z
29 Starting and stopping Z
You already know how to start and stop Z, from the previous chapter. In this section we present more information related to the starting and stopping of Z.
29.l Starting Z
In the previous chapter, we said that Z was started by specifying the name of the file to be edited on the command line:
Z filename
Z can also be started without specifying a file name or by specifying a list of files to be edited
29.1.1	Starting Z without a filename
When Z is started without a filename being specified, you will normally tell Z the name of the file to be edited, once it's active, using the :e command:
:e filename
It isn't absolutely necessary for Z to know the name of the  file you're editing: Z will allow you to create and modify text in the text buffer without knowing the name of the file to which you intend to write the text. But then you'll have to explicitly tell Z to write the text, using the command
:w filename
Z can't automatically write the text, since it doesn't know which file you're editing.
29.1.2	Starting Z with a list of files
Z can be started and passed a list of names of files to be edited, as follows:
Z filel file2 ...
Z will remember the list, and make the first file in the list the 'edit file'; that is, read the file into the main text buffer and allow it to be edited
Z has a command, :n, which will make the next file in the list the edit file, after writing the contents of the text buffer back  to  the current edit file.
File lists are discussed in more detail below.
29.1.3	The optioos file
Z has several options for controlling its operation in different situations. You've already met most  of them, including  the 'autoindent',  'macro  wrap',  and  other  options.  The  complete  list  of

- util.92 -
z	Starting and Stopping Z
options will be presented later. In this section, we want to present another feature of Z related to options; the ability to set options automatically, when Z is started
When Z starts, it will read options from the file named 'z.opt', if it exists. Z looks for the file in different places on different systems.
On PCDOS and on the Macintosh, the environment variable ZOPT defines the name of the options file. If this variable doesn't exist, or if the file isn't found there, Z then looks for the file z.opt on the current directory on the default drive.
Each line in the options file defines the value of one option, with a statement of the form
opt=val
where 'opt' is the name of the option, and 'val' is its value. For example, the following sets the 'tab width' option to 8 characters:
ts=8
2.9.1.4 Setting options for a file
When Z makes a file the 'edit file' by reading it into the edit buffer, the file itself can specify the options to be in effect during its edit session. This feature is most useful in editing files which have different tab settings.
A file specifies option values by including strings of the form
:opt=val
in the first ten lines of the file. For example, the following line could be used near the front of a C program, causing a tab width of 8 characters to be used:
/*  :ts=8	*/
When  Z starts editing a file, the tab width  is set back to the default














- util.93 -
z	Starting and Stopping Z	z
value, 4 characters, before the file is scanned for option settings.
2.9.2 Stopping Z
In the preceding chapter we presented the following commands for stopping Z:
zz

:q!
If the file's text in the edit buffer has been modified, the text is written to the file, after changing the extension of the original file to ".bale''.
Stops Z without writing the text to the file.
Two other commands for exiting Z are:
:wq	Which is the name as ZZ, except that the text in the main text buffer is always written to the file, even if no changes have been made;
:q	Which conditionally stops Z If no changes were made to the file's text, Z stops; otherwise, it displays a message and remains active.



























- util.94 -
z	Accessing Files	z
2.10 Accessing files
Z has other commands for accessing files besides ZZ and :wq, and we're going to discuss them in this chapter.
Z usually knows the name of the file you are editing, and in the sections that follow we will call this the 'edit file'. Z makes use of this knowledge, allowing you to write to the edit file without specifying it by name. For example, the ZZ command writes text to the edit file without requiring you to enter the name of the file.
Some commands allow you to access files without redefining Z's idea of the edit file. The commands described in the next two subsections fall into this category.
Other commands cause Z to terminate editing of one file and begin editing another; this  new file becomes the  edit file. The commands described in the other sections of this section are of this type.
2.10.1 File names
In the Z commands that require a file name, the name is usually entered using the standard system conventions. However, some characters are special to Z:
#	Refers to the last edit file;
%	Refers to the current edit file;
\	Causes the next character to be used in the filename and not be interpreted
To enter a file name which contains these characters, precede the special character with the character '\'. For example, on PCDOS, to edit the file
a:\subs\ hello.c use the command
:e \\subs\ \hello.c
On PCDOS, the '/' character can also be used as a separator between directories and between a directory and file name. Thus, the above command could also be entered as:
:e /subs/ hello.c
2.10.2 Writing files
The command :w writes the contents of the main text buffer to a file, without redefining the identity of the current edit file. It has the following forms:
:w	Write to the current edit file;
:w	Write to the specified file;
:w!	Same as ':w filename', but the file is overwritten if it exists.

- util.95 -
z	Accessing Files	z
As with all colon commands, carriage return must be typed to cause Z to execute the command
When entered without a filename, :w creates a new file having the name of the current edit file and writes the contents of the edit buffer to it. This form of the :w command is commonly used to periodically save text during a long edit session, to guard against system failures.
The option bk tells Z whether it should save the original edit file before creating a new one. If bk is l the original will be saved, and if 0 it won't. Z saves the original file by changing its name to .bak. An existing .bak file will be erased before the rename occurs. For details on setting options, see the Options section.
When a filename is entered with the :w command, the text is written to that file, if it doesn't already exist. If it does, nothing is written, and Z displays a message on the status line; in this case you must use the :w! form of the command to overwrite the file.
The :w! command unconditionally writes  the text to the specified file, after truncating the file, if it exists, so that nothing is in it. Unlike the :w command which doesn't specify a file name, the :w! command doesn't save the original file as a ".bak" file.
210.3	Reading files
The command
:r filename
merges  one  file  with  a  file  being  edited,  without  redefining   the identity of the edit file.
It reads the contents of the specified file into the main text buffer, inserting the new text following the line on which the cursor is located It doesn't alter text which is already in the edit buffer.
210.4	Editing another file
The following commands cause Z to stop editing one file and begin editing another, which thus becomes the 'edit file':
:e	Edit the specified file;
:el	Edit  the  file, discarding  changes  to  the  current  edit file;
:e	Reload the current edit file;
:e!	Reload the current edit file, discarding changes;
:e	Re-edit the previous edit file;
""	Synonym for ':e #'. (the command is 'control-"').
Z begins editing another file by erasing the contents of the main text buffer and the unnamed buffer, resetting the tab width to  four characters, redrawing the display with the first screenful of lines from the file, and setting the cursor at the first character in the text

- util.96 -
z	Accessing Files
When switching to a new edit file, Z doesn't change the contents of the named buffers. Thus, these buffers can be used to hold text which is to be moved from one file to another and to contain commonly used macros.
The command
:e filename
causes the specified file to conditionally become the edit file. The condition is that changes must not have been made to the text of the current edit file since it was last written to disk. If this condition is met, then the switch is made; otherwise, Z displays a message on the status line and nothing is changed: the identity of the edit file is the same, the contents of the edit buffer are not modified, and the options are not changed
If Z doesn't let you switch edit files when you enter
:e filename
and you want to save the changes to the current edit file, enter the sequence:
:w
:e filename
You can unconditionally cause Z to begin editing a new file by entering:
:e! filename
In this case, Z doesn't care whether or not you made changes to the current edit file since it was last written to disk; it begins editing the new file without changing the previous edit file.
Sometimes the text in the edit file may get hopelessly scrambled, and you want to get a fresh copy of the edit file  contents. The command
:el
specified without a file name will do just that
Z not only remembers the name of the current edit file you're editing; it remembers the name of the last file you edited as well Z allows you to refer to this name using the character '#' in :e commands, thus providing a quick means to re-edit the previous edit file:
:e #
causes the previous edit file to conditionally become the current edit file, and



- util.97 -
z	Accessing Files	z
:e! #
causes it to unconditionally become the edit file.
The command "'"' (that is, control-"') is a synonym for ':e #'.
Z also remembers the position at which the cursor was located in the previous edit file, and when you  begin re-editing this file it sets the cursor back to this position.
210.5	File lists
Z's 'file list' feature is convenient to use when you have  several files to edit you pass Z a list of the files and begin editing the first one. When you're finished with one file, a command switches to the next file in the list, after automatically saving the changes to  the current edit file. An option to the command prevents Z from saving changes, and another command "rewinds" the file list so that you're back editing the first file in the list again.
There's two ways to pass the list of files to be edited to Z: as parameters to the command that starts Z, and as parameters to the ':n' command In each case, Z remembers the list and makes the first file in the list the 'edit file'. For example,
Z file I  file2 file3
starts Z and defines the list of files file ,file2, and file3. Z makes file l the edit file; that is, prepares it for editing by reading it into the edit buffer and displaying its first lines.
When Z is active, the command
:n file4 file5 file 6
defines a new list of files: file4 file5 and file6. Z makes file4 the edit file.
When used without a files list, the ':n' command switches from one file in the list to the next
:n	Writes the  text  in  the edit buffer  to the current edit file before switching;
:n!	Switches without writing anything to the current edit file.
The ':rew' command "rewinds" the file list; that is, makes the first file in the list the edit file. This command behaves like the ':n' command, in that it by default writes changes to the current edit file before rewinding; and when an exclamation mark is appended to the comand, the rewind occurs without writing to the current edit file.
210.6	Tags
Z has a feature useful for editing large C programs which contain many functions distributed over several files. With the aid of a cross-

- util.98 -
z	Accessing Files
reference file relating 'tags', that is, function names, to the files containing them, you simply tell Z the name of the function that you want to edit and Z makes the file containing it the edit file by reading it into the edit buffer and positioning the cursor to the function.
The  following  commands  specify  the  tag  of  the  function  to  be edited:
:ta tag
:ta! tag
Position to the function named 'tag' in the appropriate file, if the current edit file is up to date;
Same as ':ta tag', but the switch to the new file occurs even if the current edit file isn't up to date.
When using the ':ta' command, the current  edit file is considered 'up to date' if the text in the edit buffer hasn't been modified since it was last written to the file. When used without the trailing '!', the ':ta' command won't switch edit files if the current edit file isn't up to date; it'll just display a message on the status line. You can then either write the text in the edit buffer to the file and re-enter the ':ta' command, or immediately enter the ':ta!' command, to switch edit files anyway.
The command
AJ
that is, control-], is convenient when, while editing  or viewing one function, you want to edit or examine a function which it calls. You just set the cursor to the name of the called function and enter 'A]'; Z will make the file containing the called function the edit file, and position the cursor to this function.
For example, while examining the file crtdvr.c, you may come across a call to the function pcdvr, and want to take a look at it. By positioning the cursor at the beginning of the word 'pcdvr' and typing 'A]', Z will make the file containing pcdvr the edit file and leave the cursor positioned at this function.
2.10.7 The CTAGS utility
The  utility  program  ctags  creates  the  cross  reference  file,  tags,
which relates function names to the file containing them.
ctags is activated by a command of the form ctags file l file2 ...
where filel, ..., are names of files whose functions are to be placed in the cross reference file. A file name can specify a group of files using the character '*'. For example:
•.c
specifies all files whose extension is ".c", and



- util.99 -
z	Accessing Files
f*.c
specifies all files whose first character is •r and whose extension is ".c".
ctags considers a character string in a file it is scanning to be a function name, for inclusion in the cross reference file if it's a valid C name which begins on the first column of a line and which is terminated by an open parenthesis character. Thus, the function which begins
HLE *
fopen(...
would be  included in the cross reference,  but the function which begins
HLE * fopen(... wouldn't
ctags creates the cross reference file, tags, in the current directory on the default drive.
When a tags command is given, Z searches for this file in locations which differ from system to system. On PCDOS, it searches for the file in the current directory on the default drive.























- util.100 -
z	Executing System Commands
2.11 Executing system commands
On PCDOS, Z has two commands which allow you to execute system commands while Z is active and then return to Z:
:!cmd	Executes the system command 'cmd';
:!!	Re-executes the last command
For example,
:!dir *.c
executes the system command 'dir *.c' and returns to Z.

































- util.101 -
z	Options
212 Options
Z has has several options under user control which define how Z behaves in certain situations. Most of these  options  have  been discussed peripherally in previous sections, when appropriate. In this section we want to focus on the options.
Each option is identified by a code. The options and their codes are:
ai	The 'autoindent' option. When this option is enabled and you begin inserting text on a new line, Z automatically indents the line by inserting tabs and spaces so that the first character you type will be located in the same column as the first non-whitespace character on the previous line. By default, this option is enabled
eb	The 'error bells' option. When this option is enabled, Z will beep when you make a mistake. By default, this option is enabled
ma	The 'magic' option. When this option is enabled, regular expessions used in string searches can include extended pattern matching characters. Otherwise, only the characters '"'' and '$' are special and the extended pattern matching constructs are gotten by preceding them with ". By default, this option is disabled
ts	The 'tab set' option. Specifies the number of characters between tab settings. By default, the tab width is four characters.
wm	The 'wrap on macro' option. When this option is enabled, and a macro being executed reaches the end of the buffer, the macro will wrap around to the beginning of the buffer and continue. By default, this option is enabled
ws	The 'wrap on search' option. When this option is enabled, and a search for a string reaches the end of the buffer without finding the string, the search continues at the opposite end of the buffer. By default, this option is enabled
bk	This option defines whether z, when a :w command is entered to write the edit buffer  to  the  current  edit file, should save the original edit file before creating a new one.
An option is enabled by setting it to I,and disabled by setting it to
0.


- util.102 -
z	Z vs. Vi	z
2.13  z vs. Vi
Z is very similar to the UNIX editor VI:
*	Both are full-screen editors, display text in the same way, and reserve one line of the display for messages;
*	They have the same two modes: command and insert;
*	Z supports most of the Vi commands.  The Z commands are activated by the same keystrokes and perform the same functions as their Vi counterparts.
Z and Vi differ in the following v.iays:
*	In Z, the buffer in which text is edited is entirely within RAM memory; in Vi, the buffer is both in memory and on disk Because of this, Z is restricted in the size of program that can be edited, but Vi is not;
*	A single copy of Vi can be configured to use any type terminal. A single copy of Z is pre-configured to use just one terminal;
*	Vi has an underlying editor, ex, whose commands can be executed while Vi is active. Z doesn't have an underlying editor. However, Z does support some ex commands directly; these are the commands whose first character is ':'. (Vi interprets the ':' as a request to execute the ex command which is entered after the ':');
*	Vi has commands and options useful for editing documents and for editing LISP programs, but Z doesn't;
*	With Vi, you can create a shell and suspend Vi while executing commands from within the new shell With some Vis, you can also suspend Vi while executing commands from the shell that activated Vi. Z doesn't support either of these features, although it will allow you to suspend Z while executing a single system command;
*	Vi saves the last nine deleted blocks of text, and has commands with which it can recover them, if necessary. Z lets you recover the last deleted block;
*	With Vi, operator commands can affect exactly the characters between the starting and ending cursor positions, even when the positions are on different lines. It has variations of these commands which allow whole lines to be affected, between and including the lines containing the two positions.
In Z, operator commands in which the starting and ending cursor positions are on  different lines always affect whole lines, between and including the lines containing the two positions.





- util.103 -
Command Summary
3. Command Summary

Starting Z
z name
z name 1 name2 ....

The Display
- lines
@ lines "x
tabs

Options
ai= I/0 eb= l/O ma=O/ l ts= val wm= l/O ws= l/O bk= l/O

Adjusting the Screen
"F
"B
"D
"U
zCR
z-
'Z.

Positioning within File
g
G
/pat
?pat
n
N
]]
[[
%
z



edit file name
edit file name I, rest via :n


lines past end of file
lines that don't fit on screen control characters
expand to spaces, cursor on last


auto-indent  on/off error bells on/off magic off/on
tab width (4)
wrap on search when executing macro
wrap on search scan save original file as .bak


forward screenful backward screenful scroll down half screen scroll up half screen
redraw, current line at top redraw, current line at bottom redraw, current line at center


go to line (default is end of file) go to line (default is end of file)
move cursor to pat searching forwards move cursor to pat searching backwards repeat last / or ?
repeat last / or ? in reverse direction next ""{"
previous ""{"
find matching (), {}, or [].




- util.104 -
z

Marking and Returning
"
"
mx
'x
•x

Line Positioning
H M L
+
CR

LF
j
"K
k

Character Positioning
0
A

$ space "'L
1
"'H
h fx Fx tx Tx
Command Summary



previous context
first non-white at previous context mark position with letter 'x'
to mark 'x'
first non-white at mark 'x'



top of screen middle of screen bottom of screen
next line, first non-white next line, first non-white previous line, first non-white next line, same column
next line, same column previous line, same column previous line, same column


beginning of line
first non-white at beginning of line end of line
forward a character forward a character forward a character backwards a character backwards a character find character 'x' forward
find character 'x' backwards
position before character 'x' forward position before character 'x' backwards repeat last f, F, t or T
repeat last f, F, t or T in reverse direction
move to specified column number









- util.105 -
Command Summary


Words and Paragraphs
w
w
b
B
e
E
}
{

Insert and Replace
a
A
i
I
0
0
rx R
z


word forward
blank delimited word forward back word
back blank delimited word end of word
end of blank delimited word to next blank line
to previous blank line



append after cursor append at end of line insert before cursor
insert before first non-blank in line open line below current line
open line above current line replace single character with 'x' replace characters

Corrections During Insert
"'H
"'D
"'X
"'V

Operators
d c
<
>
y
erase last character erase last character
erase to beginning of insert on current line insert following character directly



delete
delete and insert left shift
right shift yank












- util.106 -
z

Miscellaneous  Operations
D
c
s
s
J
x
x
y

Yank and Put
p
p
"xp
"xy
"xd

Undo and Redo
u
u

Macros
@x
"xv
@@
v
Command Summary



delete rest of line change rest of line substitute characters substitute lines
join lines
delete characters starting at cursor delete characters before cursor yank lines


put after current put before current put from buffer 'x' yank to buffer 'x' delete to buffer 'x'


undo last change restore current line
repeat last change command


execute macro in buffer 'x' execute macro in buffer 'x' repeat last macro
repeat last macro















- util.107 -

Command Summary


Colon Commands

z
:e name
:e
:e! name
:e!
edit file name reedit last file
edit file name, discarding changes reedit last file, discarding changes

:e #
AA
:e! #
:r name
:w
:wq
:w name
:w! name
:q
:q!
:x
ZZ
edit alternate file edit alternate file
edit alternate file, discarding changes read file "name" into current file write back to file being edited
write back to file and quit
write to file "name" if does not exist write to file "name", delete if exists quit
quit, discarding changes quit, saving file if modified quit, saving file if modified

:f
"G
:n
:n!
:n argl arg2 ....
:rew
:rew!
:ta tag "]
:ta! tag
:!cmd
:!!
:>macro
show current file and line show current file and line edit next file in list
edit next file in list, discarding changes specify new list
point back to beginning of list
point back to beginning, discarding changes position to tag in appropriate file
same as :ta using word at cursor position to tag, discarding changes
execute cmd, then return (PCDOS only) re-execute last cmd (PCDOS only) specify and execute immediate macro

:set optl=val opt2=val ...	set editor options
:se optl=val opt2=val ...	set editor options
:set all	display current option settings
:[range]s/ pat/ rep/[options]	substitute rep for pa.t in range
:[range]&	repeat last substitute command











- util.108 -
